**Introduction**

In this assignment, we chose to explore the [Chicago Crimes](https://data.cityofchicago.org/stories/s/Crimes-2001-to-present-Dashboard/5cd6-ry5g) dataset, which contains reported crimes categorized by location, description, and date of incident. For our visualization, we chose to focus on the variables date and type to gain insight into if the decrease in reported crimes in Chicago is true across every type of crime. For our visualization, we created a line chart displaying the amount of reports for different types of crime in Chicago for every year from 2001 to 2025. Each line on the chart represents a different type of crime, such as Battery or Theft, and each data point on the lines represents the number of reports that crime had that year.

**Design Rationale**

In our visualization, we implemented a tooltip which appears when hovering over any given line, which provides insight into the peak number of incidents for that crime in a given year, the most recent year's reports of that crime, and what the percentage change is from the first reported year to the last reported year. Additionally, we a method to filter through crimes on the displayed graph. Users can click on items in the legend to select and deselect the crimes they want to be displayed on the line graph. Additionally, users can click on a line in the graph to view it individually, with all the other lines cast out. 

Initially, we thought that it would be useful to be able to click on individual lines to view that specific crime's trends over the years, but after plotting the data it was clear that most of the lines overlapped each other on the bottom of the chart which made clicking a specific line impractical if implemented on its own. As a result, we supplemented this feature with filtering by turning the boxes in the legend into buttons that remove and add their respective line from the chart. For additional clarity, crimes that are currently removed from the chart are colored grey to show they are turned off.

During implementation, we faced a problem with lines crowding at the bottom of the chart, which resulted in difficulty seeing trends for less frequently reported crimes. To fix this, we added dynamic axis scaling which automatically sets the maximum range of the y axis to be the maximum value among currently activated lines. This way, the chart zooms in when viewing less frequently reported crimes, allowing for closer examination.

We added tooltips to further enhance the readability of our visualization. When you hover over a line, you will see a tooltip that displays which crime that line corresponds to, as well as various insightful metrics which allow users to see a crime's general trend. We also added grid lines to make it easier to read where each point falls on the y-axis.

We wanted to include a description of all the features and how to use them, so when the page is first loaded, we added a dismissible text box that explains the toggling of the lines and tooltips on hover.

Finally, we used the legend itself to encode some more information. We ordered the items on the legend from most to least total reports, which allows the user to quickly identify which crimes were more frequently reported than others across the full time range. We feel this is an intuitive way to interpret the item order in the legend, especially with the line chart having the same color gradient, so we did not plainly write this fact on the page itself. 

**Development Process**

During the first stage of our development process, we faced issues with the size of the full dataset, which contained 8 million rows and about 10 columns, which caused the live server to break when it attempted to load the data. However, for the purpose of our intended visualization, we did not need the details of each specific crime—just the totals for crimes grouped by type and year. This gave us an avenue to significantly reduce the size of our working dataset. To deal with this, we wrote a script (csv_grouper.py) which reorganized the data into a new csv that only tracks the total reports for each crime each year rather than having a row for every individual report. This cut down the csv to about 300 rows and 3 columns, which is much easier to work with. We also worked to group together redundant crime categories in the dataset in order to make the process of color-coding each crime category in the legend easier. For instance, crimes labeled as "CRIM SEXUAL ASSAULT", "CRIMINAL SEXUAL ASSAULT", and "SEX OFFENSE" were grouped into one category labeled "Criminal Sexual Assault". We also removed a category, DOMESTIC ABUSE, because it had 1 report across the entire data set, which we felt was an outlier.

For the visualization itself, we decided to split the work into three sections, building the initial non-interactive line chart, building the feature for selecting and deselecting lines on the graph, and adding tools to highlight specific lines on the graph with tooltips. 

William worked on cleaning the initial dataset and building the non-interactive line chart. He wrote a script using pandas to handle the original csv and after generating the grouped dataset, he manually deleted the categories that were obvious outliers. For the line chart, he incorporated the function structure from lab 4/5 for updating axes and adding a legend to our visualization. The most difficult part here was the legend, as everything on the page needed to be rescaled to prevent the legend from being cut off. It was also difficult to properly order the legend. The default ordering in the csv was mostly alphabetical, but we felt that it made more sense to order it by quantity of reports. This way, the legend itself communicates some information since it is intuitive to collate a higher listing in the legend as a more frequent crime. 

Anoushka worked on the selection and deselection for crimes on the chart, as well as tooltip for conveying information about the trends of a highlighted crime. Adding the selection and deselection feature involved making changes to functions that update the axes, update the visualization, and add the legend. Within the addLegend function, event handling was added on the boxes to add and remove crimes from the hidden set when clicked, which was accompanied by changing the color of the legend box from colored to grey and vice versa. After the changes are reflected on the legend, updateAxes and updateVis are called, which were modified to account for all crimes in the hidden set when drawing lines and setting axes. The most difficult part about implementing this feature was figuring out the flow of events to achieve the intended functionality and which functions had to be altered, which took around 3 hours to get working. The tooltip was less difficult to implement due to the groundwork being laid out for its implementation in lab 4-5, but in order to convey more information, Anoushka placed the metrics in a styled div, which was more of a challenge as compared to the tooltip implemented in lab. This took approximately an hour gather the correct information for the desired metrics, and an additional hour to style.

Omeed focused on enhancing visual clarity and implementing data filtering through a "color switcher" mode. This involved creating a global boolean state to toggle the visualization between a multi-colored chart and a grey-scale highlight "mode" where specific lines pop out in color when they are hovered over. To implement this, the setupSelector() function was modified with an event listener to change the boolean value, calling addVis() and addLegend() after doing so. Within these function, ternary operators were used to dynamically adjust the stroke colors of both the chart lines and the legend markers. This was fairly simple as it involved using programming principles present in other languages. To enable specific line highlighting, event listeners for mouseover and mouseout were added, using class based selection and the "this" keyword to isolate individual data lines. This part was difficult at first due to Omeed's limited Javascript experience and difficulty understanding how to isolate data. Additionally, the Bootstrap framework was used to integrate a Modal for user onboarding and a toggle button for the view modes. While the toggle button was eventually replaced with Anoushka's legacy based filtering system in the final part of the project, it helped develop some foundational aspects for what should be included in the visualization. The implementation of these features took roughly five hours, reflecting an effort to improve the UI design of the app utilizing Javascript event handling techniques, new frameworks, and feedback from other team members. 


**Dataset**

The full dataset can be found here: https://data.cityofchicago.org/stories/s/Crimes-2001-to-present-Dashboard/5cd6-ry5g
The data records every reported crime in Chicago from 2001 to February 28, 2026 at the time of writing. The data excludes murders that have data for each victim. The data was collected using the Chicago Police Department's CLEAR system.
